The year is not quite up, but I have begun to feel it is a good time to look back and see if there is any development of my skills,both technical and non technical.

One way this can be assessed is of course the matrix, looking at the procedures etc. required for each year but sometimes it is just a quiet moment and thinking through things and wondering how I would have handled them differently in the past.

A good example came very recently, indeed the very beginning of the shift I am currently doing as I write this. I had jokingly messaged the day registrar earlier about getting all the babies delivered so I could have a restful night. I arrive at 2055 and hear a grade 1 CS being called. I gather it is for a para 1 in labour at 8cm, having a 9 minute bradycardia with APH. I get changed quickly, awkardly squeezing into our phonebox inspired changing room with the babies dad and having to tell him he can't wear my theatre shoes but have to find his own. This is for his own sake as well, I've worn them for several months.

Grab a hat, walk across the corridor and swipe the door into theatre and am greeted with absolute utter chaos. The patient ( is thrashing around. The CTG is on and this bradycardia has now being going on for 15 minutes. The day reg tells me it has recovered and she might be fully.

I tune out the rest of the noise and listen, then turn up the monitor - it 100% has not recovered, it's at about 40. These people have lost the plot a bit. It happens. I ask him to do a VE whilst I scrub - she is a rim. I shout across the melee to put a catheter in. I say very clearly this is a GA - the patient can't even lie still, never mind sit up for a spinal, the FH is in its boots and she is still bleeding. It all starts to work but then the consultant appears. Having changed into scrubs he now wants to do a VE as well (I later learnt this was the 4th examination done since they called the cat 1, having both VE'd the patient in the room before transfer to theatre as well). He starts saying she is fully, then a rim, then a hand presenting, then just cephalic. Tries to get the woman to push, presumably to push the rim of cervix away. Interestingly the same manoevre was tried the night before unsuccessfully. Decides we can do forceps but also mutters the head is a bit high so maybe ventouse is better.

At this point I thought back to a case in Derby. Twins, spont preterm labour. Patient in distress, thrashing around. Baby 1 born. Baby 2 coming down as a shoulder. Unsuccessful attempt by senior reg at IPV in the room (no analgesia). Move to theatre. Everyone still disagreeing what to do, whether or not to put the CTG on and do a spinal. Then, the coordinating midwife, who was blessed with a loud and commanding voice simply spoke over everyone - "we haven't heard the FH on twin 2 for 6 minutes, stop messing about and put her to sleep and do the CS". Perhaps the right thing to do by the books would be a scan to check for the FH. In fairness there was no real reason to think it wouldn't be there, beyond the usual stresses of a second twin, and it was fine 6 minutes earlier. Even if it had stopped, the baby could be resuscitated most likely so absolute the priority was to get the kid out. So we did. I asked her later about it, and she just said sometimes you realise you have to speak up.

Fast forward back to May 2023. I have a patient whose name I don't even know who, who 30 seconds after walking into the room had determined she needed a general anaesthetic for CS findings and clinical situation. Now I have a consultant saying she might (emphasis on might) be deliverable by forceps. This is the same patient who wasn't able to speak a single word due to pain, who was thrashing about on the theatre trolley. Her baby has a heart rate of 40. He has come up with 3 different VE findings in 30 seconds. Sometimes you have to speak up. I rarely raise my voice. It is almost alien to me. But today it was needed. "You can't do forceps. We have one chance to deliver this baby, it has to be CS and she needs to go to sleep now. Move out of the way so I can prep" Slightly scary but he stepped back. Then said if she had an epidural or spinal we could deliver vaginally. I pointed out we did not have those things nor the time to get them and asked him, and the room in general, are we agreed then that she needs a GA and a CS? "Yes yes yes do it!". FFS. This whole intervention took 4 minutes (the midwife helpfully marked it on the CTG).



Helpfully he stuck around, guiding me through each step of the C section; "no don't do th...never mind you're in" As my hand reached for the babies head I found it was the usual second stage thing of low head, impacted deep in the pelvis. Another helpful hint from the consultant ..."it's not that low don't worry"....1 minute earlier he was musing about an instrumental delivery so I wasn't really sure what to make of that and really basically wanted him to go away and just be on standby if I needed him.


So, my hand is deep in this woman's pelvis yet still not above/below/whatever the amorphous disjointed skull this poor baby had. I am aware the FH is almost certainly still low, indeed I could practically feel it through my hand (kid was OP as well to boot, something that wasn't mentioned when a trial of instrumental delivery was being muttered about). How am I going to get him out quickly and easily?

Quick flashback to exam revision and second stage CS. What is the presenting diameter of the vertex? Irrelevant, it ain't coming out that way. How am I going to get it out the sunroof then because at the moment it doesn't seem to be coming out that way either. Do we use foetal pillow here? Nope, probably too late for that. Could someone push up from below? They could but I've never been a fan of that. I could try to go round the other side perhaps but the issue was my hand just didn't fit in the space and that wouldn't be any easier from the patient's left. Bit of a pickle this. Wish this was one of those shifts where I was running 5 minutes late and I'd be still walking in from the car and this would all be someone else's problem. Well tough shit, it's my problem.

Anyway, 24 minutes now probably the foetal bradycardia. Don't really have time to faff about. Need something that's going to work. Breech extraction it is. Don't think I need to enlarge the incision. I reached up instead of down, got the feet, gently retreived the kid and delivered easily, clamped the cord and cut the baby free to the midwife. Needed few minutes of inflation breaths and stuff, we had the paeds reg there given the scenario at the start. Total time from uterine incision to delivery - 20 seconds. Not bad considering. Placenta came away with usual amount of resistance, not an obvious abruption at least. No idea where the APH came from.

Consultant still there, decides to jump in and help now. He scrubs and help with the uterine closure. This was fine with me, my assistant tonight has been a highly uninterested GP trainee and this was a bit more complicated than usual. I didn't particularly need the help though. There was a small uterine extension on the left but easy to fully visualise and repair. Put a drain in and closed up. Both mum and baby were fine. Thought a bit about future pregnancy - decided she could be considered for VBAC as the issue was malposition of the head coupled with urgent need to deliver that prevented vaginal delivery. Once she was awake, did a decent little debrief about events as well.


















Important points
The scenario above - framing it as a leadership exercise from walking into theatre to when the baby was delivered and incision closed.

How has this played out differently compared to perhaps how it would have done a year ago?

Reflection
Reading this back I am aware of being quite critical of my consultant. But I had some advantages here. I've literally just arrived at work after a restful day between nights. He was in with me for 4 hours the night before, and been at work all day. He has been around when a category 1 was called, so felt he had to be present. He was caught up in the situation - distracted by the fact she was para 1 and almost fully so surely if we can just get that last bit of cervix away she can deliver quicker with forceps - possibly a good plan in other circumstances. I walk in. My encounter with the babies dad focused me a little bit. The key thing is the baby is born safely. What do I see? Chaos is the most apt description.

But you can break it down.
I have a consultant, they are usually helpful. Usually decisive and authoritative. Usually make the correct judgement and decision. In this instance they don't seem to be fulfilling those roles.
The patient is already in theatre and a "decision" has been made, but it seems like nobody is really committed to it yet as they keep deciding to re-examine.
The day registrar is there but also seemingly a bit lost about what to do.
The CTG is clearly not recovered, just turning it up makes that point audible to all.

What do I need?
A decision. Is delivery indicated - ? Yes - urgently.
Is vaginal delivery acheivable - ? No, she is a rim.
Can we do a spinal before CS? - no, there is probably time if mum was calm but she is not, and she is in pain from multiple examinations, heightened levels of cortisol and adrenaline rushing through, the general situation in the room around her all amplifying things. So she needs a GA.

Decision made.

Decision communicated.

Decision about to be implemented, but the consultant reappears and decides to revisit it all. I was annoyed at this. We were ready to go but because he is a consultant, people listen to him. Then he started with the drivel about his VE findings, oscillating between CS for compound presentation to ventouse to forceps. I'm standing with my skin prep next to the patient. I really wanted him to just leave me to it. I had a brief recollection of some "tool" used in NUH for this type of scenario where you need to challenge a senior decision maker. Couldn't remember it for the life of me what the specifics were, but it was something like - ask a question to show you are wanting to query it, challenge? escalate? I don't know. So I went with "Move out of the way so I can prep". It seemed to do the trick, but then more hesitation ensued, saying if we had a spinal we might be able to deliver vaginally so I went with a question - "are we agreed that she needs a GA and a CS?" and finally confirmation of the plan I made 5 minute ago.

How does it feel being in this scenario? It isn't easy actually. I do stick up for myself when I feel it is needed - see previous reflections for more info on that; I don't put up with unfair criticism and I don't let bullying and undermining go unchallenged; having previously reported a consultant to the medical director over this. But that is usually about me; and usually it is done via e-mail or conversation in an office. Quite possibly members of the panel who read this have ended up in tit-for-tats with me over things over the years as well.

The difference here was this in theatre, with two patients waiting on our collective decision and implementation. There wasn't time to write a draft, edit it, sit on it overnight, re-edit it, send it and then wait to see what response came. It had to be verbal, it had to be loud and clear and authoritative and not revisited again. So I found my voice and made it clear I was now in charge. It was actually quite easy.

I think this encounter shows a lot of development in a year or so. I felt a bit downtrodden in ST4, "junior" registrar, always all the crap rolled down to me to do, distracted by covering obs and gynae in a much busier unit, sleep deprived, generally miserable - it wasn't a good environment in which to emerge as a strong leader. Since then however things have changed a lot, I'm much happier in life in general for lots of reasons; I've worked as the registrar in a single tier unit for best part of a year and found myself equal to the challenges that brings. I have a good relationship with those who work here and feel there is mutual respect between all of us. But also that I can stick my head up above the parapet and tell others to follow my lead, not just always be following.